---
layout: article
title: 'To Hold In Mind'
date: 2019-2-8
---

A prospective MIT student recently asked me a challenging question: to succeed in college, what single thing would you recommend to hold in mind?

About a year ago, I had many discussions on this topic with friends and acquaintances. One of the unifying themes that we felt our high school selves hadn't intuited or internalized fully: that college is a stepping stone as opposed to an end goal in itself.

With a frenzied and status-driven college admissions process, a student can easily anchor her identity and self-worth on external judgments. Even though everybody tells you that you can succeed anywhere, that it doesn't really matter where you go to school, you still may feel a secret need to "be worthy" of your top choice school.

There is a winner-take-all dynamic in many human systems: political influence, college endowments and prestige.

, political influence,  our economy. Many human systems are governed by power laws, whereas.



we flatten comparable experiences of others. Bill Gates, Warren Buffet, Mark Zuckerberg, Michael Jordan, Tiger Woods, Magnus Carlsen, Bezos, Musk, Oprah...there was no single day when these people became the best, the most successful. Stephen King, JK Rowling. Nobody can get skinny or ripped or massively overweight in a single day. Your brain doesn't become smart by reading a single book or taking a single class or not procrastinating once. All good things really take time, and daily investment. It's a matter of putting in hours and hours and many many days of sustained effort. Do not subscribe to the illusion of life-changing moments. Every moment is life changing. Sun Tzu says that the successful general first wins the battle then goes to war. Gates and Buffet say that focus has given them success. Adults often learn the hard way that building habits is hard, and entropy will dissolve over time especially the grandest ambitions, they have a way of never materializing. But daily small steps towards your goal. Making things approachable and attainable. These are possible, and what will ultimately lead to victory. Every successful person has failed and tried again. They have all met daily obstacles, and they all started from birth as having no backgorund. They all have little stories of how they kept going. For many, things call to them. Writing, music, business, engineering, research. Find something that calls to you. It won't ever call to you all the time...But sometimes it will, and make sure those are enough to sustain you in the interim, to hold over your regular efforts in that direction, to spin up a virtuous cycle of success.

Many great people are humble. I wouldn't call myself great,
I don't personally have anything huge to brag about. In part this is a testament to my big dreams. I have a sense of perspective that my work will never be done. But I have built some things, a decent level of chess playing ability, founding a nonprofit organization, running programs year after year, doing math throughout childhood. Anyone can tell you it's hard to build something. To create, to turn an idea into the Human Genome Project or Amazon or the mom and pop bakery around the corner or a habit of painting or reading books. It's easy to quit: piano, relationships, physics, soccer, internships...so many things I've dropped by the wayside. But it's hopefully in service to the larger narrative, the things which will eventually dominate my future success.
Every significant milestone on my resume or whatever came from history of things. Having relationships with amazing people was built on having relationships with many people. Practicing conversation skills with bus drivers and homeless chess players and adults and kids. Learning to value someone for who they are and not to judge them. Graduating in 3 years from MIT came from me being able to jump into sophomore classes because I had the mathematical and academic maturity of 2 years of college already. Every standardized test I took involved a perfect score because I spent hours doing the material in advance. I never used spark notes once. I got lots of feedback on writing and saw improvements year over year, since 5th grade. I know how to sail after capsizing more than a dozen times at camp in 6th grade. I can ice skate because my mom held my hand for years as I bruised my bottom. I broke my elbow roller blading. I vomited when trying out for soccer so hard that I was sucking air. I lost every tournament game I played in chess until I won. You need to see this pattern. Set yourself up to hit milestones you can be proud of, and take pride in the ones you've already hit because they show you what you need to do to hit the next one. It's OK to start now. Don't go out with your friends to party on a Friday night if you don't want to. Brad said nope, I can't stay up talking with you from 8:30-9:30. I actually need to start getting ready for bed now so I can get to sleep by 9, so I can wake at 4:30am and study physics. I have a full Saturday to take advantage of, and I need to do physics to get good at physics. It's likely that if you are doing some field, there are people way ahead of you. You are behind. And this is something that burns out MIT people. They either feel success is unattainable for them or they know it's possible and the let the effort slowly kill them. You need to find a way to exert yourself without burning out. And that happens through love, through trial and error, through asking successful people for tips, but most importantly through practicing living the life you want to live--or finding out how if you don't yet know. Most people don't know exactly how, or they cannot commit to doing it...that's why it's hard and that's why success feels rarified.

truly poisonous to live with mismatched expectations, to be influenced by others in a way not in harmony with your soul, or to flouder around forever. Don't die with regrets. Try your best each day, pat yourself on the back for days well-lived, and make yourself proud. Commit to doing what you need to do to reach your success. step one: define it for you, do mini projects to experiment for fit, then go all-in and fly.  

calibrate mental models towards long-term thinking, and you will begin to ask the hard questions. What happens next, how do I get there? What do I NEED to do today to set myself on that path? What do I need to avoid, who or what is taking away from that effort, what do I truly need to take care of myself. What's essential?

Even when you internalize these sorts of things, you can be good at analyzing others and yourself without ever CREATING. You need to go out and create. Tinker. Experiment. Spend hours in your room just doing a thing. Want to play music by ear? Sit at a piano for 5 hours and fail at it. Then do it again tomorrow. Don't just watch Youtube motivational videos all day and write to-do lists that are unfulfilled. Take action, build a habit of executing. Read a few things if you like, Seth Godin the dip is really all you need to know. Draw the most from others you can, do it efficiently, so you can make time to draw long-term value from yourself.

if you're the kind of person who wants success...means many things to different people. There's a reason standard things are standard. Common wisdom is easy to reject, and often hard to agree with. Defining Decade.
depth of knowledge is ridiculously deep
to succeed, double rate of failure
go ahead and explore
push yourself to commit to things in healthy ways
at the end of the journey it's ok not to have life figured out.
but if you would like to work on your personal development, career, academic goals, service, or relationships...know that it's easiest to say no with a brighter yes burning inside.
Those who take advantage in a directed way, however success is defined, turning college into rocket fuel, treating the time and experiences as investments, those people are able to focus on what matters to them.
They draw out and deeply explore the few things that they have found really resonate and stick with them, and say no to things which might detract from those core foci. Choosing what to spend time on is critical, and undervalued is what you choose to not spend time on.
Asking yourself why you do something, having a thorough reasoning that rings of ground truth to you is all you need. Society or other people including family, academic advisors, or peers, may not value certain things as you do. And that's OK.
It's a hard, learned skill to really dive all the way into why. But eventually, I would say to try thinking deeply or feel in your bones about what you do, make it be a conscious choice. You don't have to know the full lay of the land at your destination. But when you set sail, at least have a reason to head in a certain direction. Your plans may change on the way, but letting the wind blow you around has a lower probability of landing you where you want yourself to be.
Being thoughtful and honest to yourself, do I know yet what things are satisfying to me? Commit to following projects all the way, as far as you can take them. Start with the end, start with why.


“Passion and drive are not the same at all. Passion pulls you toward something you cannot resist. Drive pushes you toward something you feel compelled or obligated to do. If you know nothing about yourself, you can't tell the difference. Once you gain a modicum of self-knowledge, you can express your passion....It's not about jumping through someone else's hoops. That's drive.”

―Randy Komisar, _The Monk and the Riddle: The Education of a Silicon Valley Entrepreneur_.
